that's how we traveled in the year 1900
that's an open buggy it doesn't have
heating it doesn't have air-conditioning
that horse is pulling it along at 1% of
the speed of sound and that rutted dirt
road turns into a quagmire of mud
anytime it rains
that's a Boeing 707 only 60 years later
it travels at 80 percent of the speed of
sound and we don't travel any faster
today because commercial supersonic air
travel turned out to be a bust so I
started wondering and pondering could it
be that the best years of American
economic growth is behind us and that
leads to the suggestion maybe economic
growth is almost over some of the
reasons for this are not really very
controversial there are four headwinds
that are just hitting the American
economy in the face their demographics
education debt and inequality they're
powerful enough to cut growth in half so
we need a lot of innovation to offset
this decline and here's my theme because
of the headwinds
if innovation continues to be as
powerful that it has been in the last
hundred and fifty years growth is cut in
half if innovation is less powerful
invents less great wonderful things then
growth is going to be even lower than
half of history now here's eight
centuries of economic growth the
vertical axis is just percent per year
growth zero percent a year 1% a year 2%
a year the white line is for the UK and
then the US takes over as the leading
nation in the year 1900 when the line
switches to red you'll notice that for
the first four centuries there's hardly
any growth at all just 0.2 percent then
growth gets better and better it maxes
out in the 1930s 40s and 50s
and then it starts slowing down and
here's a cautionary note that last
downward not in the
Red Line is not actual data that is a
forecast that I made six years ago the
growth would slow down to 1.3 percent
but you know what the actual facts are
you know what the growth and per person
income has been in the United States in
the last six years negative this led to
a fantasy what if I try to fit a curved
line to this historical record I can
make the curved line anywhere I want to
end anywhere I wanted but I decided I
would end it at zero point two just like
the UK growth for the first four
centuries now the history that we've
achieved is that we've grown at two
point zero percent per year over the
whole period 1891 to 2007 and remember
it's been a little bit negative since
2007 but if growth slows down instead of
doubling our standard of living every
generation Americans in the future can't
expect to be twice as well off as their
parents or even a quarter as well off as
their parents now we're gonna change and
look at the level of per capita income
the vertical axis now is thousands of
dollars in today's prices
you'll notice that in 1891 over on the
Left we were at about five thousand
dollars today we're at about forty four
thousand dollars of total output per
member of the population now what if we
could achieve that historic 2% growth
for the next 70 years well it's a matter
of arithmetic two percent growth
quadruples your standard of living in
seventy years that means we'd go from
forty-four thousand to one hundred and
eighty thousand but we're not going to
do that and the reason is the headwinds
the first headwind is demographics it's
a truism that your standard of living
rises faster than productivity Rises
faster than output per hour
if hours per person increased and we got
that gift back in the 70s and 80s when
women entered the labor force but now
it's turned around now hours per person
are shrinking first because of the
retirement of the baby boomers and
second because there's been a very
significant dropping out of the labor
force of prime age adult males
are in the bottom half of the
educational distribution the next head
win is education we've got problems all
over our educational system despite race
to the top in college
we've got cost inflation in higher
education that Dwarfs cost inflation and
medical care we have in higher education
a trillion dollars of student debt and
our college completion rate is 15 points
15 percentage points below Canada we
have a lot of debt our economy grew from
2000 to 2007 on the back of consumers
massively over borrowing consumers
paying off that debt is one of the main
reasons why our economic recovery is so
sluggish today and everybody of course
knows that the federal government debt
is growing as a share of GDP at a very
rapid race and the only way that's going
to stop is some combination of faster
growth in taxes or slower growth in
entitlements also called transfer
payments and that gets us down from the
one point five where we've reached for
education down to one point three and
then we have inequality over the 15
years before the financial crisis the
growth rate of the bottom 99% of the
income distribution was half a point
slower than the averages we've been
talking about before all the rest went
to the top 1% so that brings us down to
0.8 and that 0.8 is the big challenge
are we going to grow at 0.8 if so that's
going to require that our inventions are
as important as the ones that happen
over the last 150 years so let's see
what some of those inventions were if
you wanted to read in 1875 at night you
needed to have an oil or a gas lamp
they created pollution they created
odors they were hard to control the
light was dim and they were a fire
hazard by 1929 electric light was
everywhere we had the vertical city the
invention of the elevator central
Manhattan became possible
and then in addition to that at the same
time hand tools were replaced by massive
electric tools and hand powered electric
tools all achieved by electricity
electricity was also very helpful
in liberating women women back in the
late 19th century spent two days week
doing laundry they did it on a scrub
board then they had to hang the clothes
out to dry then they have to bring them
in the whole thing took two days out of
the seven-day week and then we had the
electric washing machine and by 1950
they were everywhere but the women still
had to shop every day but no they didn't
because electricity brought us the
electric refrigerator back in the late
19th century the only source of heat in
most homes was a big fireplace in the
kitchen that was used for cooking and
heating the bedrooms were cold they were
unheated but by 1929 certainly by 1950
we had central heating everywhere what
about the internal combustion engine
which was invented in 1879 in America
before the motor vehicle transportation
depended entirely on the urban horse
which dropped without restraint 25 to 50
pounds of manure on the streets every
day together with a gallon of urine that
comes out at 5 to 10 tons daily per
square mile in cities those horses also
ate up fully one-quarter of American
agricultural land that's the percentage
of American agricultural land that took
to feed the horses of course when the
motor vehicle was invented and it became
almost ubiquitous by 1929 that
agricultural land could be used for
human consumption or for export and
here's an interesting ratio starting
from 0 in 1900 only 30 years later the
ratio Motor Vehicles to the number of
households in the United States reached
90% in just 30 years back
before the turn of the century women had
another problem all the water for
cooking cleaning and bathing had to be
carried in buckets and pails in from the
outside it's a historical fact than in
1885 the average North Carolina
housewife walked 148 miles a year
hearing 35 tons of water but by 1929
cities around the country had put in
underground water pipes they had put in
underground sewer pipes and as a result
one of the great scourge --iz of the
last late 19th century waterborne
diseases like cholera began to disappear
and an amazing fact for techno optimists
is that in the first half of the 20th
century the rate of improvement of life
expectancy was three times faster than
it was in the second half of the
nineteenth century so it's a truism that
things can't be more than a hundred
percent of themselves and I'll just give
you a few examples we went from one
percent to ninety percent of the speed
of sound electrification central heat
ownership of motor cars they all went
from zero to 100 percent urban
environments make people more productive
than on the farm we went from 25 percent
urban to 75 percent by the early
post-war years what about the electronic
revolution here's a early computer it's
amazing that mainframe computer was
invented in 1942 by 1960 we had
telephone bills bank statements were
being produced by computers the earliest
cell phones the earliest personal
computers were invented in 1970s the
1980s brought us bill gates das ATM
machines to replace bank tellers barcode
scanning to cut down on labor in the
retail sector fast forward through the
90s we had the dot-com revolution and a
temporary rise in productivity growth
but I'm not going to give you an
experiment you have to choose either
option A or option B
option a you should get to keep
everything invented up until 10 years
ago so you get Google you get Amazon you
get Wikipedia and you get running water
and indoor toilets or you get everything
invented the yesterday including
Facebook and your iPhone but you have to
give up go out to the outhouse and carry
in the water Hurricane sandy caused a
lot of people to lose the 20th century
maybe for a couple of days in some cases
for more than a week electricity running
water heating gasoline for their cars
and a charge for their iPhones the
problem we face is that all these great
inventions we have to match them in the
future and my prediction that we're not
going to match them brings us down from
the original 2% growth down to 0.2 the
fanciful curve that I grew you at the
beginning so here we are back to the
horse and buggy I'd like to award an
Oscar to the inventors of the 20th
century the people from Alexander Graham
Bell to Thomas Edison to the Wright
brothers I like to call them all up here
and they're going to call back to you
your challenge is can you match what we
achieved thank you
[Applause]
[Music]